JUDY WOODRUFF: The battle
to retake Mosul from
ISIS is nearing its end.
And yet a new deadly campaign is
under way by some Iraqi forces
of revenge and retribution
against those suspected to
have fought for or aided ISIS.
From Northern Iraq, special
correspondent Marcia Biggs and
videographer Alessandro Pavone
report.
And a warning: Images and
accounts in this story
may disturb some viewers.
MARCIA BIGGS: It starts at dawn
here in West Mosul, members
of Iraqi special forces going
door to door in search
of ISIS sleeper cells.
Clashes continue in a small
pocket of the Old City, but for
most of Mosul, this is where
the fight against ISIS stands.
In some houses, we find the
remnants of life under ISIS.
This was a Da'esh
prison, he says.
So this was once the home
of a local politician.
When ISIS took the area, they
turned his house into a jail.
ISIS imprisoned anyone
who didn't pledge loyalty
to them, who didn't
join them and stick to
their rules, this
lieutenant says.
They considered them outlaws.
After several hours searching,
they come across this man, who
they believe may have escaped
the current clashes
in the Old City.
He is arrested immediately.
Do you believe he
is an ISIS fighter?
MAN (through translator):
I think he is.
He is not from this area.
No one has ever seen here.
People here don't know him.
He is very thin, and
the I.D. card is fake.
So, probably he is ISIS.
MAN (through translator):
For no reason, the militias
took my son five months ago.
We don't know where.
We are not ISIS.
My son is a shepherd.
If we were ISIS, you
could come and kill me.
Ask anyone here.
(GUNFIRE)
MARCIA BIGGS: Just last week,
this photo emerged of suspected
ISIS fighters rounded up and
held in a small dark room in
the 120-degree heat, an eye for
an eye, as the captors become
captive.
Dr. Mansour Maarouf Mansour
was working in Qayyarah General
Hospital when this video
was taken last spring.
The hospital was inundated
with unidentified bodies
coming down the Tigris River.
The morgue could barely
handle the grim deluge.
A local resident described the
what he saw at the riverbank.
MAN (through translator):
They had their hands
tied behind their backs.
They were blindfolded
and shot in the head.
They were floating
down the river.
MARCIA BIGGS: And just last
week, even more bodies.
You received a lot of bodies
that looked to have been the
victims of execution, is that
right?
MAN: Yes.
MARCIA BIGGS: What was the state
of the bodies that you received?
DR.
MANSOUR MAAROUF MANSOUR, Iraq:
Yes, most of them were killed
by shooting to the head.
It's very little in compared
to those who were killed by
the liberation process, through
the mines, land mines,
or the bombs, mortar
bombs, or airstrike.
MARCIA BIGGS: The number
of civilian casualties
has been staggering.
Former Kurdish Deputy Prime
Minister Hoshyar Zebari says
at least 40,000 dead, many of
them at the hands of coalition
airstrikes, which include both
Iraqi and American firepower.
As residents return
home to a Mosul depleted
of ISIS fighters, the
new campaign may be
one of collective
punishment against possible
ISIS sympathizers.
We traveled to a village just
south of the city, where many
of the residents collaborated
with ISIS.
We had heard reports of
so-called revenge death squads
coming for them in the dead of
night.
Um Nazim's husband was a taxi
driver, and she says he just
joined the group to survive.
He was later killed
in an airstrike.
She was too scared to let
us show her full face.
UM NAZIM, Iraq (through
translator): They told us, if
your sons and husbands do not
declare loyalty, we will bring
back the religious police
and we will behead them.
He was an old man when we were
threatened, so he was scared.
He thought it would be
better to declare loyalty.
It is better than being killed.
MARCIA BIGGS: Since the
liberation of her town
from ISIS, she says
local militias have
threatened her, demanding
that she leave, even shooting
up and raiding her home.
UM NAZIM (through translator):
We have lost our minds.
Every night when we sleep,
we don't know if we will
be alive in the morning.
What is our life?
We were all throwing their
clothes in bags, but we
didn't know where to go.
We don't have money to
leave or even to rent a car.
I don't know what
to do, where to go.
I was pacing back and
forth in the front yard.
I told them, kill me.
It's better than this.
Come on and kill me
and end my suffering.
MARCIA BIGGS: The Iraqi
government maintains that any
abuse is being dealt with in due
process, and Iraqi commanders
admit the mistakes.
MAJ.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JUBOURI, Iraqi
Commander: We don't lead eagles.
We lead humans.
I mean, our soldiers,
our police, they are
human, not eagles.
Maybe someone make some bad
thing, but the majority, the
general of our forces deal very
good with the people.
MARCIA BIGGS: So what do you
do when you find out one of
your men has been part of this
abuse?
MAJ.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JUBOURI: We put
him in the jail, and we
send him to the court.
e
MARCIA BIGGS: Do you worry about
revenge attacks creating an
atmosphere that would make Iraq
vulnerable to another ISIS?
MAJ.
GEN.
NAJIM AL-JUBOURI: Yes,
I worry about that.
We try to push the local
government to put some
solution to these things.
MARCIA BIGGS: Human rights
groups say this is not enough.
TOM PORTEOUS, Deputy Program
Director, Human Rights Watch:
The Iraqi government sometimes
responds to our reports and
our advocacy by making the
right sort of noises and making
the right kinds of statements,
but it's never followed up with
a proper procedure to secure
accountability for the
abuses that we document.
You can win the war militarily
against the Islamic State, but
if you continuing to commit
abuses with impunity, then you
are simply sowing the seeds for
the reemergence of extremism
and radicalism in Iraq.
MARCIA BIGGS: Like many Sunni
Arabs that lived under ISIS, Um
Nazim feels she is under siege
by the Shia-dominated government
and militias that fought and
won the battle against ISIS.
Do you hope that
ISIS will come back?
UM NAZIM (through translator):
I don't hope that ISIS will
come back, but there was peace
and no one interfered in
the life of anyone else.
No one oppressed anyone.
The situation was calmer.
MARCIA BIGGS: For you, but
for those who weren't part of
ISIS, they were very scared.
UM NAZIM (through translator):
No, no one in Iraq was scared.
Everybody was living in peace
under ISIS, not just us, because
my husband was with ISIS.
MARCIA BIGGS: But
how can you say that?
We have heard so many stories
of people who were killed,
people who were repressed, who
couldn't go to school?
UM NAZIM (through
translator): I don't know.
I didn't go out.
I didn't see anything.
I'm only responsible for
myself, not for others.
I didn't see anyone kill
anyone else in front of me.
I heard people say that
others were killed, but
who knows who killed them.
MARCIA BIGGS: What do you say
to the children whose parents
were killed by ISIS suicide
bombers?
UM NAZIM (through
translator): I don't know.
I didn't see.
I wasn't with ISIS to
know anything about that.
ISIS became a state
and a government.
Who can say anything to
them under their rule?
MARCIA BIGGS: Like many under
occupation, Um Nazim turned a
blind eye in order to ensure
her own safety.
The dust is beginning
to settle in Mosul, but
revenge can be a dirty game.
The battle may have ended,
but a new war in Iraq
may be just beginning.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Marcia Biggs in
and around Mosul, Iraq.